Experiment – 6

Explore cloud platforms like AWS, Azure, or GCP. Create and configure a virtual machine
instance using a cloud service provider (e.g., AWS, Azure, or Google Cloud).
Aim
To study and explore various cloud platforms such as AWS, Azure or GCP and to create a virtual machine using any cloud service provider.

1.	Choose a Cloud Platform: Select a cloud service provider that aligns with your project needs, such as AWS for infrastructure, Azure for enterprise-ready features, or GCP for big data and AI applications. 
2.	Sign Up and Create an Account: Register on the cloud platform's website and create an account. This will give you access to the platform's services and tools.
3.	Navigate to the Cloud Console: Log in to the cloud console and find the section for creating and managing virtual machines.
4.	Select the Instance Type: Choose the type of virtual machine instance you need, such as EC2 for compute, or VPS for virtual private servers.
5.	Configure the Instance: Fill in the necessary details, such as the instance name, memory, CPU, storage, and network settings.
6.	Launch the Instance: Once configured, launch the instance to start using it for your project.
7.	Monitor and Manage: Use the cloud platform's tools to monitor and manage your instance, ensuring it meets your performance and resource requirements.
8.	Test and Deploy: Test the instance to ensure it meets your project requirements, then deploy your application or service.
By following these steps, you can successfully create and configure a virtual machine instance using a cloud service provider like AWS, Azure, or GCP.
Cloud Service Used
Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud
Tools Required
•	AWS Account (Free Tier)
•	Internet Connection
•	SSH Client (Putty/Terminal)

Theory (Short & Exam-Friendly)
A virtual machine (VM) is an on-demand computing instance that runs on cloud infrastructure. It provides scalable computing power without physical hardware. 
Procedure (AWS EC2)
1.	Login to AWS Console.
2.	Navigate to EC2 → Click Launch Instance.
3.	Choose AMI (Ubuntu 22.04).
4.	Select Instance Type (t2.micro – Free Tier).
5.	Create Key Pair and download .pem file.
6.	Configure Security Group:
o	Allow SSH (Port 22)
7.	Launch Instance.
8.	Connect using:
ssh -i key.pem ubuntu@public-ip
Successfully created and connected to a cloud virtual machine.
Procedure (Google Cloud VM with Compute Engine)
Create a new instance from the Cloud console
In this section, you create new predefined machine types with Compute Engine from the Cloud console.
1.	In the Cloud console, on the Navigation menu (☰), click Compute Engine > VM Instances.
This may take a minute to initialize for the first time.
2.	To create a new instance, click Create Instance.
3.	In the Machine configuration:
Enter the values for the following fields:
Field	Value	Additional Information
Name	gcelab	Name for the VM instance
Region	<REGION>	For more information about regions, see the Compute Engine guide, Regions and Zones.

Zone	<ZONE>	Note: Remember the zone that you selected to use later. For more information about zones, see the Compute Engine guide, Regions and Zones.

Series	E2	
Machine Type	e2-medium	This is an e2-medium, 2-CPU, 4GB RAM instance. Several machine types are available, ranging from micro instance types to 32-core/208GB RAM instance types. For more information, see the Compute Engine guide, About machine families.


4.	Click OS and storage.
Click Change to begin configuring your boot disk and select the values for:
•	Operating system: Debian
•	Version: Debian GNU/Linux 12 (bookworm)
•	Boot disk type: Balanced persistent disk
•	Size: 10 GB
Several images are available, including Debian, Ubuntu, CoreOS, and premium images such as Red Hat Enterprise Linux and Windows Server. For more information, see the Operating System documentation. 
5.	Click Networking.
•	Firewall: Allow HTTP traffic
Select this option in order to access a web server that you install later.
Note: This automatically creates a firewall rule to allow HTTP traffic on port 80.
6.	Once all sections are configured, scroll down and click Create to launch your new virtual machine instance.
It should take about a minute for the VM, gcelab, to be created. After gcelab is created, the VM Instances page lists it in the VM instances list.
7.	To use SSH to connect to the VM, click SSH to the right of the instance name, gcelab.
This launches an SSH client directly from your browser.
Install an NGINX web server
Now you install an NGINX web server, one of the most popular web servers in the world, to connect your VM to something.
1.	Run the following command to update the OS:
sudo apt-get update
	Expected Outcome:
	 
2.	Run the following command to install NGINX:
sudo apt-get install -y nginx

Expected output:
 
3.	Run the following command to confirm that NGINX is running:
ps auwx | grep nginx

Expected output:
 
4.	To see the web page, return to the Cloud console and click the External IP link in the row for your machine, or add the External IP value to http://EXTERNAL_IP/ in a new browser win-dow or tab.
A default web page should open that says: Welcome to nginx!
To check your progress in this lab, click Check my progress below. A checkmark means you're successful.
Create a new instance with gcloud

Instead of using the Cloud console to create a VM instance, use the command line tool gcloud, which is pre-installed in Google Cloud Shell. Cloud Shell is an interactive shell environment for Google Cloud loaded with all the development tools you need (gcloud, git, and others) and offers a persistent 5-GB home directory.
Note: If you want to try this on your own machine, read the gcloud command line tool guide.
1.	In Cloud Shell, run the following gcloud command to create a new VM instance from the command line:
	gcloud compute instances create gcelab2 --machine-type e2-medium --zone=$ZONE
Expected output:
 
	The new instance has these default values:
•	The Debian GNU/Linux 12 (bookworm) image.
•	The e2-medium machine type.
•	A root persistent disk with the same name as the instance; the disk is automatically attached to the instance.
When working in your own project, you can specify a custom machine type.
2.	To see all the defaults, run the following command:

		gcloud compute instances create –help

Note: You can set the default region and zones that gcloud uses if you are always working within one region/zone and you don't want to append the --zone flag every time.
To do this, run these commands:

	gcloud config set compute/zone ...

	gcloud config set compute/region ...
3.	To exit help, press CTRL+C.
4.	In the Cloud console, on the Navigation menu ( ), click Compute Engine > VM in-stances. Or if you still had the VM instances page open, just click Refresh. Your two new instances should be listed.
5.	You can also use SSH to connect to your instance via gcloud. Make sure to add your zone, or omit the --zone flag if you've set the option globally:
	gcloud compute ssh gcelab2 --zone=Zone
	Copied!
6.	Enter Y to continue.
   Do you want to continue? (Y/n)
7.	Press Enter through the passphrase section to leave the passphrase empty.
 	Generating public/private rsa key pair.
   	Enter passphrase (empty for no passphrase)
8.	After connecting, disconnect from SSH by exiting from the remote shell with the com-mand that follows:
	exit


Result:
          Successfully explored cloud platforms such as AWS and GCP. Also, Created and configured virtual machine instances using Amazon EC2 and Google Compute Engine and Installed & verified NGINX web server on the created VM instance.
